---
title: 5.4.0 (unreleased)
---

# 5.4.0 (unreleased)

## Overview

- [Features and enhancements](#features-and-enhancements)
  - [Option to change `ClassName` column from enum to varchar](#classname-varchar)
  - [Reports quality of life updates](#reports-quality-of-life-updates)
  - [New `class_description` configuration on `DataObject`](#class-description)
  - [Other new features](#other-new-features)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
- [Bug fixes](#bug-fixes)

## Features and enhancements

### Option to change `ClassName` column from enum to varchar {#classname-varchar}

On websites with very large database tables it can take a long time to run `dev/build`, which can be a problem when deploying changes to production. This is because the `ClassName` column is an `enum` type which requires an a `ALTER TABLE` query to be run affecting every row whenever there is a new valid value for the column. For a very rough benchmark, running an `ALTER TABLE` query on a database table of 10 million records took 28.52 seconds on a mid-range 2023 laptop, though this time will vary depending on the database and hardware being used.

This release introduces a new configuration option to change the `ClassName` column to a `varchar` type which removes the need to run `ALTER TABLE` whenever there is a new valid value.

Enabling this will result in a trade-off where the size of the database will increase by approximately 7 MB per 100,000 rows. There will also be a very slow initial `dev/build` as all of the `ClassName` columns are switched to `varchar`. To enable this, add the following configuration:

```yml
SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject:
  fixed_fields:
    ClassName: DBClassNameVarchar

SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBPolymorphicForeignKey:
  composite_db:
    Class: "DBClassNameVarchar('SilverStripe\\ORM\\DataObject', ['index' => false])"
```

### Reports quality of life updates

Numerous slight adjustments have been made to the [`ReportAdmin`](api:SilverStripe\Reports\ReportAdmin) class for a better experience.

The changes include:

- Search capability added (making use of [`PartialMatchFilter`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Filters\PartialMatchFilter))
- Sorting by columns now posssible
- Default Sort is now `Title ASC`
- Reports list is now paginated
- [`Description`](api:SilverStripe\Reports\Report::description()) is now displayed in the list as a column

### New `class_description` configuration on `DataObject` {#class-description}

[`SiteTree`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree) and [`BaseElement`](api:DNADesign\Elemental\Models\BaseElement) both seperately implemented a `description` configuration property which was used to describe the purpose of a given subclass. For `SiteTree` this is used when creating a new page in the CMS. For `BaseElement` this is used in the elemental blocks report. In both cases the purpose is the same - it provides additional context about the intended use case for a given subclass.

We've now implemented this concept in `DataObject` directly with the new [`DataObject.class_description`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject->class_description) configuration property. It is now considered best practice to add a description of `DataObject` subclasses using this configuration. You can use the new [`DataObject::classDescription()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject::classDescription()) and [`DataObject::i18n_classDescription()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject::i18n_classDescription()) methods if you need a description of any `DataObject` class. Those methods already existed on `SiteTree` but have been moved up the hierarchy so they can be called on any `DataObject` class.

For now this is only used in the same places that used to use the deprecated configuration, but future minor releases are likely to broaden the scope of its usage.

As a part of this change, the [`SiteTree.description`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree->description) and [`BaseElement.description`](api:DNADesign\Elemental\Models\BaseElement->description) configuration properties are now deprecated. Use `class_description` instead.

The `SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree.DESCRIPTION` localisation key (along with the `.DESCRIPTION` suffix for any `SiteTree` subclass) will stop being used in a future major release. Use `SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree.CLASS_DESCRIPTION` instead.

### Other new features

- A new [`BaseKernel::getBooted()`](api:SilverStripe\Core\BaseKernel::getBooted()) method has been added for checking whether the kernel has been booted yet or not.
- A new [`CoreKernel::setBootDatabase()`](api:SilverStripe\Core\CoreKernel::setBootDatabase()) method has been added to replace the now deprecated [`DatabaselessKernel`](api:SilverStripe\Core\DatabaselessKernel) class.
- Two new methods have been added to [`ArrayLib`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayLib):
  - [`ArrayLib::insertBefore()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayLib::insertBefore()) for inserting a value before another value in an array
  - [`ArrayLib::insertAfter()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayLib::insertAfter()) for inserting a value after another value in an array
- A new [`DBDatetime::getTimeBetween()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBDatetime::getTimeBetween()) method has been added. This method returns the amount of time that has passed between two `DBDateTime` objects as a human-readable string.
- A new [`AbstractQueuedJob::getQueue()`](api:Symbiote\QueuedJobs\Services\AbstractQueuedJob::getQueue()) static method has been added to get the correct queue constant from a given string or int.
- New [`GridFieldFilterHeader::setPlaceHolderText()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField::GridFieldFilterHeader::setPlaceHolderText()) and [`GridFieldFilterHeader::getPlaceHolderText()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField::GridFieldFilterHeader::getPlaceHolderText()) methods have been added which provide a way to override the `GridFieldFilterHeader` search field placeholder text if the dynamically generated text doesn't suit your use case.
- [`RequiredFields`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\RequiredFields) can be to set to determine whether a whitespace only value, such as a single space character, is considered a valid value or not. This can be set globally via the [`RequiredFields.allow_whitespace_only`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\RequiredFields->allow_whitespace_only) config, which has a default value of `true` to retain backwards compatibility. This can also be set on a per-instance basis via [`RequiredFields::setAllowWhitespaceOnly()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\RequiredFields::setAllowWhitespaceOnly()) which will override the global config. See [form validation docs](/developer_guides/forms/validation/#requiredfields-and-whitespace) for more details.

## API changes

- The class names for the `TopPage` feature in [`dnadesign/silverstripe-elemental`](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-elemental) do not follow the correct naming convention for Silverstripe CMS. The existing classes have been deprecated and will be renamed to match the correct naming convention in a future major release.
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayLib`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayLib) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Core\ArrayLib`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayList`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ArrayList) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\ArrayList`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\Filterable`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Filterable) has been deprecated. It will be merged into [`SS_List`](api:SilverStripe\Model\List\SS_List).
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\GroupedList`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\GroupedList) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\GroupedList`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\Limitable`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Limitable) has been deprecated. It will be merged into [`SS_List`](api:SilverStripe\Model\List\SS_List).
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\ListDecorator`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ListDecorator) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\ListDecorator`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\Map`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Map) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\Map`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\PaginatedList`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\PaginatedList) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\PaginatedList`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\Sortable`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\Sortable) has been deprecated. It will be merged into [`SS_List`](api:SilverStripe\Model\List\SS_List).
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\SS_List`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\SS_List) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\List\SS_List`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\ValidationException`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ValidationException) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Core\Validation\ValidationException`
- [`SilverStripe\ORM\ValidationResult`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\ValidationResult) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Core\Validation\ValidationResult`
- [`SilverStripe\View\ArrayData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ArrayData) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\ArrayData`
- [`SilverStripe\View\ViewableData`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\ModelData`
- [`SilverStripe\View\ViewableData_Customised`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData_Customised) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\ModelDataCustomised`
- [`SilverStripe\View\ViewableData_Debugger`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData_Debugger) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Model\ModelDataDebugger`
- [`CliBypass`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Middleware\ConfirmationMiddleware\CliBypass) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CliController`](api:SilverStripe\Control\CliController) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `symfony/console` commands.
- [`DatabaselessKernel`](api:SilverStripe\Core\DatabaselessKernel) has been deprecated. Use [`CoreKernel::setBootDatabase()`](api:SilverStripe\Core\CoreKernel::setBootDatabase()) instead.
- [`BuildTask.segment`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\BuildTask->segment) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `$commandName` property.
- [`BuildTask->description`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\BuildTask->description) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new static property with the same name.
- [`BuildTask::getDescription()`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\BuildTask::getDescription()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new static method with the same name.
- [`DevBuildController`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevBuildController) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\Dev\Command\DbBuild` class.
- [`DevConfigController`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevConfigController) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\Dev\Command\ConfigDump` class.
- [`DatabaseAdmin`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DatabaseAdmin) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\Dev\Command\DbBuild` class.
- [`DevelopmentAdmin::buildDefaults()`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevelopmentAdmin::buildDefaults()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\Dev\Command\DbDefaults` class.
- [`DevelopmentAdmin::generatesecuretoken()`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevelopmentAdmin::generatesecuretoken()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\Dev\Command\GenerateSecureToken` class.
- [`DevelopmentAdmin::getRegisteredController()`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevelopmentAdmin::getRegisteredController()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`DevelopmentAdmin.registered_controllers`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\DevelopmentAdmin->registered_controllers) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with new `controllers` and `commands` configuration properties.
- [`CleanupTestDatabasesTask::canView()`](api:SilverStripe\Dev\Tasks\CleanupTestDatabasesTask::canView()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `canRunInBrowser()` method.
- [`HTTPOutputHandler`](api:SilverStripe\Logging\HTTPOutputHandler) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Logging\ErrorOutputHandler`
- [`Build`](api:SilverStripe\GraphQL\Dev\Build) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\GraphQL\Dev\SchemaBuild` class.
- [`DevelopmentAdmin`](api:SilverStripe\GraphQL\Dev\DevelopmentAdmin) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`DevBuildExtension`](api:SilverStripe\GraphQL\Extensions\DevBuildExtension) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\GraphQL\Extensions\DbBuildExtension`
- [`LDAPGroupSyncTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\LDAP\Tasks\LDAPGroupSyncTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`LDAPMemberSyncTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\LDAP\Tasks\LDAPMemberSyncTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`LDAPMigrateExistingMembersTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\LDAP\Tasks\LDAPMigrateExistingMembersTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SubsiteCopyPagesTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Tasks\SubsiteCopyPagesTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CheckExternalLinksTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\ExternalLinks\Tasks\CheckExternalLinksTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CheckExternalLinksTask::setSilent()`](api:SilverStripe\ExternalLinks\Tasks\CheckExternalLinksTask::setSilent()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CheckExternalLinksTask->silent`](api:SilverStripe\ExternalLinks\Tasks\CheckExternalLinksTask->silent) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`RealMeSetupTask::message()`](api:SilverStripe\RealMe\Task\RealMeSetupTask::message()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`StaticCacheFullBuildTask::log()`](api:SilverStripe\StaticPublishQueue\Task\StaticCacheFullBuildTask::log()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ContentReviewOwnerMigrationTask`](api:SilverStripe\ContentReview\Tasks\ContentReviewOwnerMigrationTask) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CronTaskController`](api:SilverStripe\CronTask\Controllers\CronTaskController) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\CronTask\Cli\CronTaskCommand` class.
- [`Clear`](api:SilverStripe\GraphQLDevTools\Clear) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `SilverStripe\GraphQLDevTools\SchemaClear` class.
- [`ConvertTranslatableTask`](api:TractorCow\Fluent\Task\ConvertTranslatableTask) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`Exception`](api:TractorCow\Fluent\Task\ConvertTranslatableTask\Exception) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`UpdatePackageInfoTask->supportedAddonsLoader`](api:BringYourOwnIdeas\Maintenance\Tasks\UpdatePackageInfoTask->supportedAddonsLoader) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`UpdatePackageInfoTask::getSupportedAddonsLoader()`](api:BringYourOwnIdeas\Maintenance\Tasks\UpdatePackageInfoTask::getSupportedAddonsLoader()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`UpdatePackageInfoTask::setSupportedAddonsLoader()`](api:BringYourOwnIdeas\Maintenance\Tasks\UpdatePackageInfoTask::setSupportedAddonsLoader()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ProcessJobQueueChildTask`](api:Symbiote\QueuedJobs\Tasks\ProcessJobQueueChildTask) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a new `Symbiote\QueuedJobs\Cli\ProcessJobQueueChildCommand` class.
- [`ProcessJobQueueTask::getQueue()`](api:Symbiote\QueuedJobs\Tasks\ProcessJobQueueTask::getQueue()) has been deprecated. Use [`AbstractQueuedJob::getQueue()`](api:Symbiote\QueuedJobs\Services\AbstractQueuedJob::getQueue()) instead.
- [`HTTPOutputHandler::isCli()`](api:SilverStripe\Logging\HTTPOutputHandler::isCli()) has been deprecated. Use [`Director::is_cli()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::is_cli()) instead instead.
- [`PasswordValidator`](api:SilverStripe\Security\PasswordValidator) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Security\Validation\RulesPasswordValidator`.
- [`ContentReviewEmails::isValidEmail()`](api:SilverStripe\ContentReview\Tasks\ContentReviewEmails::isValidEmail()) has been deprecated. Use [`Email::is_valid_address()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email::is_valid_address()) instead.
- The [`DBField.defaultVal`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBField->defaultVal) property has been deprecated. Use [`DBField::getDefaultValue()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBField::getDefaultValue()) and [`DBField::setDefaultValue()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBField::setDefaultValue()) instead.
- [`DBFile::validate()`](api:SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\DBFile::validate()) has been deprecated. Use [`DBFile::validateFilename()`](api:SilverStripe\Assets\Storage\DBFile::validateFilename()) instead.
- [`ContentController::Menu()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\ContentController::Menu()) has been deprecated. Use [`ContentController::getMenu()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\ContentController::getMenu()) instead if calling the method in PHP. You can continue to use `$Menu` in templates, including passing arguments to it.
- [`GridFieldDataColumns::getValueFromRelation()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\GridField\GridFieldDataColumns::getValueFromRelation()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ViewableData::castingClass()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::castingClass()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ViewableData::escapeTypeForField()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::escapeTypeForField()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ViewableData::objCacheName()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::objCacheName()) has been deprecated. It will be made private. The corresponding [`ViewableData::objCacheSet()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::objCacheSet()) and [`ViewableData::objCacheGet()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::objCacheGet()) methods will change method signature to not require passing in the cache key.
- The `$cacheName` parameter for the [`ViewableData::obj()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::obj()) method has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ViewableData::cachedCall()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::cachedCall()) has been deprecated. Use [`ViewableData::obj()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::obj()) instead.
- [`ViewableData::XML_val()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::XML_val()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ViewableData::getXMLValues()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData::getXMLValues()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- The `$parser` parameter for the [`SSViewer::__construct()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::__construct()) method has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::flush()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::flush()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::flush()`.
- [`SSViewer::fromString()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::fromString()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::renderString()`.
- [`SSViewer::topLevel()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::topLevel()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::chooseTemplate()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::chooseTemplate()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::setTemplate()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::setTemplate()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::setTemplate()`.
- [`SSViewer::setParser()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::setParser()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::setParser()`.
- [`SSViewer::getParser()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::getParser()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::getParser()`.
- [`SSViewer::hasTemplate()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::hasTemplate()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::hasTemplate()`.
- [`SSViewer::exists()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::exists()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::getTemplateFileByType()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::getTemplateFileByType()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::flush_template_cache()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::flush_template_cache()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::flushTemplateCache()`.
- [`SSViewer::flush_cacheblock_cache()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::flush_cacheblock_cache()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::flushCacheBlockCache()`.
- [`SSViewer::setPartialCacheStore()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::setPartialCacheStore()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::setPartialCacheStore()`.
- [`SSViewer::getPartialCacheStore()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::getPartialCacheStore()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::getPartialCacheStore()`.
- [`SSViewer::includeGeneratedTemplate()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::includeGeneratedTemplate()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::includeGeneratedTemplate()`.
- The `$inheritedScope` parameter for the [SSViewer::process()](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::process()) method has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::getSubtemplateFor()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::getSubtemplateFor()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::getSubtemplateFor()`.
- [`SSViewer::parseTemplateContent()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::parseTemplateContent()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::parseTemplateContent()`.
- [`SSViewer::templates()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::templates()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::setTemplateFile()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::setTemplateFile()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::get_base_tag()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::get_base_tag()) has been deprecated. Use [`SSViewer::getBaseTag()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::getBaseTag()) instead.
- [`SSViewer_DataPresenter`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_DataPresenter) has been deprecated. It will be merged into [`SSViewer_Scope`](api:SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\ScopeManager).
- [`SSViewer_FromString`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_FromString) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateEngine::renderString()`.
- [`SSViewer_Scope::getItem()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_Scope::getItem()) has been deprecated. Use [`SSViewer_Scope::getCurrentItem()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_Scope::getCurrentItem()) instead.
- [`SSViewer_Scope::obj()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_Scope::obj()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `scopeToIntermediateValue()`.
- [`SSViewer_Scope`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_Scope) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\ScopeManager`.
- [`SSViewer::execute_template()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::execute_template()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`SSViewer::execute_string()`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer::execute_string()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ThemeResourceLoader::findTemplate()`](api:SilverStripe\View\ThemeResourceLoader::findTemplate()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`FlushMiddleware`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Middleware\FlushMiddleware) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with flushing inside the Kernel directly.
- The [`LeftAndMain.tree_class`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain->tree_class) configuration property has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `model_class`.
- [`SiteConfigLeftAndMain::save_siteconfig()`](api:SilverStripe\SiteConfig\SiteConfigLeftAndMain::save_siteconfig()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with [`save()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::save()).
- [`SSViewer_BasicIteratorSupport`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSViewer_BasicIteratorSupport) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\BasicIteratorSupport`.
- [`SSTemplateParseException`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSTemplateParseException) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\Exception\SSTemplateParseException`.
- [`SSTemplateParser`](api:SilverStripe\View\SSTemplateParser) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\SSTemplateParser`.
- [`TemplateIteratorProvider`](api:SilverStripe\View\TemplateIteratorProvider) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\TemplateIteratorProvider`.
- [`TemplateParser`](api:SilverStripe\View\TemplateParser) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\TemplateEngine\TemplateParser`.
- [`ElementalAreaController::removeNamespacesFromFields()`](api:DNADesign\Elemental\Controllers\ElementalAreaController::removeNamespacesFromFields()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`BaseElement::updateFromFormData()`](api:DNADesign\Elemental\Models\BaseElement::updateFromFormData()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`DBEnum::flushCache()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBEnum::flushCache()) has been deprecated. Use [`DBEnum::reset()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\FieldType\DBEnum::reset()) instead.
- The [`BaseElement.description`](api:DNADesign\Elemental\Models\BaseElement->description) configuration property has been deprecated. Use [`DataObject.class_description`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject->class_description) instead.
- The [`SiteTree.description`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree->description) configuration property has been deprecated. Use [`DataObject.class_description`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject->class_description) instead.
- [`FormField::extendValidationResult()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\FormField::extendValidationResult()) has been deprecated. Use `extend()` directly instead.
- [`SubsiteXHRController::canAccess()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Controller\SubsiteXHRController::canAccess()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`LeftAndMainSubsites::ListSubsites()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Extensions\LeftAndMainSubsites::ListSubsites()) has been deprecated. Use [`SubsiteSwitchList()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Extensions\LeftAndMainSubsites::SubsiteSwitchList()) instead.
- [`LeftAndMain::methodSchema()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::methodSchema()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\Admin\FormSchemaController::schema()`.
- [`LeftAndMain::Modals()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::Modals()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ModalController::getController()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::getController()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ModalController::getName()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::getName()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CampaignAdminExtension`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Extensions\CampaignAdminExtension) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CMSPageEditController::addtocampaign()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSPageEditController::addtocampaign()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CMSPageEditController::AddToCampaignForm()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSPageEditController::AddToCampaignForm()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CMSPageEditController::getAddToCampaignForm()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSPageEditController::getAddToCampaignForm()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`AssetAdmin::addtocampaign()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Controller\AssetAdmin::addtocampaign()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`AssetAdmin::AddToCampaignForm()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Controller\AssetAdmin::AddToCampaignForm()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`AssetAdmin::getAddToCampaignForm()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Controller\AssetAdmin::getAddToCampaignForm()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`ModalController::EditorExternalLink()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::EditorExternalLink()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::linkModalForm()`.
- [`ModalController::EditorEmailLink()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::EditorEmailLink()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController::linkModalForm()`.
- [`RemoteFileModalExtension::getRequest()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Extensions\RemoteFileModalExtension::getRequest()) has been deprecated. Use `RemoteFileModalExtension::getOwner()->getRequest()` instead.
- [`RemoteFileModalExtension::getFormSchema()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Extensions\RemoteFileModalExtension::getFormSchema()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`RemoteFileModalExtension::getSchemaResponse()`](api:SilverStripe\AssetAdmin\Extensions\RemoteFileModalExtension::getSchemaResponse()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `RemoteFileModalExtension::getOwner()->getSchemaResponse()`.
- [`InternalLinkModalExtension`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Forms\InternalLinkModalExtension) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with configuration on [`ModalController`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\ModalController).
- [`FormField::validate()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\FormField::validate()) will take zero arguments and return a ValidationResult object instead of a boolean in CMS 6.0.0.
- [`FieldsValidator`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\FieldsValidator) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with functionality inside [`Form::validate()`](api:Silverstripe\Forms\Form::validate()).
- [`Validator`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\Validator) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Forms\Validation\Validator`.
- [`RequiredFields`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\RequiredFields) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Forms\Validation\RequiredFieldsValidator`.
- [`CompositeValidator`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\CompositeValidator) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\Forms\Validation\CompositeValidator`.
- [`UserFormsRequiredFields`](api:SilverStripe\UserForms\Form\UserFormsRequiredFields) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\UserForms\Form\UserFormsRequiredFieldsValidator`.
- [`AWRequiredFields`](api:Symbiote\AdvancedWorkflow\Forms\AWRequiredFields) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `Symbiote\AdvancedWorkflow\Forms\AWRequiredFieldsValidator`.
- [`CMSPreviewable::CMSEditLink()`](api:SilverStripe\ORM\CMSPreviewable::CMSEditLink()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `getCMSEditLink()`.
- [`CMSEditLinkExtension::CMSEditLink()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\CMSEditLinkExtension::CMSEditLink()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\ORM\DataObject::getCMSEditLink()` and `updateCMSEditLink()`.
- [`LeftAndMain::currentPageID()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::currentPageID()) has been deprecated. Use [`LeftAndMain::currentRecordID()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::currentRecordID()) instead.
- [`LeftAndMain::setCurrentPageID()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::setCurrentPageID()) has been deprecated. Use [`LeftAndMain::setCurrentRecordID()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::setCurrentRecordID()) instead.
- [`LeftAndMain::currentPage()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::currentPage()) has been deprecated. Use [`LeftAndMain::currentRecord()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::currentRecord()) instead.
- [`LeftAndMain::isCurrentPage()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::isCurrentPage()) has been deprecated. Use [`LeftAndMain::isCurrentRecord()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain::isCurrentRecord()) instead.
- [`LeftAndMain_SearchFilter::isPageIncluded()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain_SearchFilter::isPageIncluded()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `isRecordIncluded()`.
- [`LeftAndMain_SearchFilter::getPageClasses()`](api:SilverStripe\Admin\LeftAndMain_SearchFilter::getPageClasses()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `getRecordClasses()`.
- The [`SiteTree.need_permission`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree->need_permission) configuration property has been deprecated. Use [`SiteTree::canCreate()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::canCreate()) instead.
- The [`SiteTree.icon`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree->icon) configuration property has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `cms_icon`.
- The [`SiteTree.icon_class`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree->icon_class) configuration property has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `cms_icon_class`. This applies to all subclasses of `SiteTree` as well.
- [`CMSMain::PageList()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::PageList()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `RecordList()`.
- [`CMSMain::PageListSidebar()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::PageListSidebar()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPages()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPages()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecords()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecords()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPagesWithSearch()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPagesWithSearch()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecordsWithSearch()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecordsWithSearch()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPageEdit()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPageEdit()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecordEdit()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecordEdit()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPageSettings()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPageSettings()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecordSettings()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecordSettings()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPageHistory()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPageHistory()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecordHistory()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecordHistory()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPageAdd()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPageAdd()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::LinkRecordAdd()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkRecordAdd()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::LinkPreview()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::LinkPreview()) has been deprecated. Use [`SiteTree::CMSEditLink()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::CMSEditLink()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::SiteTreeAsUL()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::SiteTreeAsUL()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::TreeAsUL()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::TreeAsUL()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::getSiteTreeFor()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getSiteTreeFor()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::getTreeFor()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getTreeFor()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::CanOrganiseSitetree()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::CanOrganiseSitetree()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::canOrganiseTree()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::canOrganiseTree()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::getSearchContext()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getSearchContext()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with [`SiteTree::getDefaultSearchContext()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::getDefaultSearchContext()).
- [`CMSMain::getPageTypes()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getPageTypes()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::getRecordTypes()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getRecordTypes()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::PageTypes()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::PageTypes()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::RecordTypes()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::RecordTypes()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::SiteTreeHints()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::SiteTreeHints()) has been deprecated. Use [`CMSMain::TreeHints()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::TreeHints()) instead.
- [`CMSMain::performPublish()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::performPublish()) has been deprecated. Use [`RecursivePublishable::publishRecursive()`](api:SilverStripe\Versioned\RecursivePublishable::publishRecursive()) instead.
- [`CMSPageAddController`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSPageAddController) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Forms\CMSMainAddForm`.
- [`CMSPagesController`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSPagesController) has been deprecated. It will be combined back into [`CMSMain`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain).
- [`CMSSiteTreeFilter::getPageClasses()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSSiteTreeFilter::getPageClasses()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `getRecordClasses()`.
- [`CMSSiteTreeFilter::isPageIncluded()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSSiteTreeFilter::isPageIncluded()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `isRecordIncluded()`.
- [`LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\LeftAndMainRecordIconsExtension`.
- [`LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension::generatePageIconsCss()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension::generatePageIconsCss()) has been deprecated. Use [`LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension::generateRecordIconsCss()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\LeftAndMainPageIconsExtension::generateRecordIconsCss()) instead.
- [`CurrentPageIdentifier`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\CurrentPageIdentifier) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `SilverStripe\CMS\Model\CurrentRecordIdentifier`.
- [`CurrentPageIdentifier::currentPageID()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\CurrentPageIdentifier::currentPageID()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `currentRecordID()`.
- [`CurrentPageIdentifier::isCurrentPage()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\CurrentPageIdentifier::isCurrentPage()) has been deprecated. It will be renamed to `isCurrentRecord()`.
- [`SiteTree::page_type_classes()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::page_type_classes()) has been deprecated. Will be replaced with `updateAllowedSubClasses()`.
- [`SiteTree::setCreatableChildrenCache()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::setCreatableChildrenCache()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::setCreatableChildrenCache()`.
- [`SiteTree::getCreatableChildrenCache()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::getCreatableChildrenCache()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getCreatableChildrenCache()`.
- [`SiteTree::getPermissionChecker()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::getPermissionChecker()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with a non-static method of the same name.
- [`SiteTree::flushMemberCache()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::flushMemberCache()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::clearCache()`.
- [`SiteTree::creatableChildPages()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::creatableChildPages()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getCreatableSubClasses()`.
- [`SiteTree::getIconClass()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::getIconClass()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getRecordIconCssClass()`.
- [`SiteTree::getPageIconURL()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::getPageIconURL()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::getRecordIconUrl()`.
- [`SiteTree::generateChildrenCacheKey()`](api:SilverStripe\CMS\Model\SiteTree::generateChildrenCacheKey()) has been deprecated. It will be replaced with `SilverStripe\CMS\Controllers\CMSMain::generateChildrenCacheKey()`.
- [`Form::validationResult()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\Form::validationResult()) has been deprecated. Use [`Form::validate()`](api:SilverStripe\Forms\Form::validate()) instead.
- [`Director::get_session_environment_type()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::get_session_environment_type()) has been deprecated. Use [`Director::get_environment_type()`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Director::get_environment_type()) instead.
- Use of the `CUSTOM_INCLUDE_PATH` constant to change the PHP include path has been deprecated and will not work in a future major release.
- [`SessionEnvTypeSwitcher`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Middleware\URLSpecialsMiddleware\SessionEnvTypeSwitcher) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`VersionProvider::getComposerLockPath()`](api:SilverStripe\Core\Manifest\VersionProvider::getComposerLockPath()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`FlushInvalidatedResource::getResource()`](api:SilverStripe\i18n\Messages\Symfony\FlushInvalidatedResource::getResource()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- [`Subsite::getMembersByPermission()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Model\Subsite::getMembersByPermission()) has been deprecated. It will be removed without equivalent functionality to replace it.
- The `$join` parameter for the [`Subsite::get_from_all_subsites()`](api:SilverStripe\Subsites\Model\Subsite::get_from_all_subsites()) method has been deprecated. Use [leftJoin($table, $joinClause)](api:SilverStripe\ORM\DataList::leftJoin()) instead.
- Passing a boolean value to the `$mergeStrategy` argument in [`Form::loadDataFrom()`](api:Silverstripe\Forms\Form::loadDataFrom()) has been deprecated. Pass [`Form::MERGE_CLEAR_MISSING`](api:Silverstripe\Forms\Form::MERGE_CLEAR_MISSING) instead of `true` and `0` instead of `false`.

## Bug fixes

This release includes a number of bug fixes to improve a broad range of areas. Check the change logs for full details of these fixes split by module. Thank you to the community members that helped contribute these fixes as part of the release!

### Change to error logging

Some errors were incorrectly being logged using the error handler service, which resulted in displaying the error in the browser and CLI and, in live mode, not displaying the rest of the response to users.

This was the result of a misunderstanding about the difference between the `Psr\Log\LoggerInterface.errorhandler` error handler service and the `Psr\Log\LoggerInterface` logging service.

The `Psr\Log\LoggerInterface.errorhandler` error handler service should *not* be used for logging - its purpose is to handle the display of uncaught exceptions and PHP errors.

Errors that were being logged to the error handler service are now being logged using the logging service instead. If you have connected a logging handler to that service, we recommend instead following the instructions in [configuring error logging](/developer_guides/debugging/error_handling/#configuring-error-logging) to attach your logging handler *only* to the logging service, which will also allow you to handle logging for the uncaught exceptions and errors the error handler displays.

<!--- Changes below this line will be automatically regenerated -->

<!--- Changes above this line will be automatically regenerated -->
